---
title: Class ✔
sidebar_position: 6
---

## Class

A java class is a group of values with a set of operations to manipulate this values. It is a <span className="danger">blueprint for creating objects</span>. A class encapsulates data for the object and methods to manipulate that data. It is use to <span className="danger">define a new data type(primitive)</span>.

### Attributes

Variables and methods used in the class are called attributes/fields. Attributes are accessed by creating an object of the class and dot notation.

:::warning
**A class contains following members:**

- Instance Variables
- Methods
- Constructor
  :::

### Instance Variable

Variable defined within a class are called instance variables because each instance of the class(that is, each object of the class) contains its own copy of these variable.

## Object

It represent an instance of a class. It's a <span className="danger">runtime entity</span> that holds the state and behaviour of a class. Object is a class type variable. When you create a class, you are creating a new data type. And you can use this data type by declaring objects of this data type.

Each time you create an object of a class, a copy of each instance variables is created except static varible, its create only once.

Objects are create using the `new` keyword. Each object is stored at a unique memory location.

**Create Object:**

```java
Box myBox; // reference
myBox=new Box(); // allocate
```

:::warning

### `new` Operator

It is used to create new objects

- allocates memory for the object on the **heap**
- initializes the object by calling its constructor
- returns a reference to that memory which is used to access the object's methods and attributes.
  ::::

## Constructor

A class contructor if defined is called whenever a program creates an object of that class. It is invoked directly when an object is created and <span className="danger">before new operator execute completely</span>.

It doesn't have any return type, not even void and hence can't return any values. It is used to initialize objects. It is called when an instance of a class is created, and it usually sets initial values for the objects attributes.

:::danger
It doesn't inherited as it's not part of class member.
:::

**Types:**

1. default constructor
2. parameterized constructor

### Default Constructor

A default constructor is automatically provided by the java compiler if no constructors are explicitly defined in a class. It initializes object fields with <span className="danger">default value(null, 0).It has the same access modifier as the class.</span>

### Parameterized Constructor

A parameterized constructor accepts parameters, allowing you to initialize the objects fields with specific values at the time of creation.

### Constructor Chaining

It refers to the process of calling one constructor from another within the same/different class. It is used to reduce code duplication and ensure proper initialization.

Each class calls the constructor of its parent class when it is instantiated, leading to a chain of constructor calls. <span className="danger">Constructor doesn't inherited as it's not part of the class member. But in every inheritance constructor of parent class will be called, which result constructor chaining.</span>

```java
class SuperParent{
    SuperParent(){
        System.out.println("I'm Super Parent");
    }
    SuperParent(int x){
        System.out.println("I'm Super Parent with "+x);
    }
}
class Parent extends SuperParent{
    Parent(){
        System.out.println("I'm Parent");
    }
    Parent(int x){
        System.out.println("I'm Parent with "+x);
    }
}
class Child extends Parent{
    Child(){
        System.out.println("I'm Child");
    }
    Child(int x){
        System.out.println("I'm Child with "+x);
    }
}
class SuperChild extends Child{
    SuperChild(){
        super(4);
        System.out.println("I'm SuperChild");
    }
    SuperChild(int x){
        System.out.println("I'm SuperChild with "+x);
    }
}
```

Output:

```
I'm Super Parent
I'm Parent
I'm Child with 4
I'm SuperChild
```

## Method

Variables used in method signature are called parameter, and variables used during call are called arguments.

**Parameter vs Argument**

| Term      | Meaning      | Where Used           |
| --------- | ------------ | -------------------- |
| Parameter | Placeholder  | In method definition |
| Argument  | Actual value | In method call       |

Instance method can call an instance methods directly. There is no need to use object.

Static method can only be called from a static method.

### Method Overloading

When more than one method with the same name is defined in the same class,it is known as method overloading as long as their parameter declarations are different.

:::danger
**Method overloading is a way to achieve `static polymorphism` in java.**
:::

### Method Overriding

The ability of a subclass to re-implement an instance method inherited from a superclass is called method overriding.

:::danger

- overriding method must have same argument list and return type.
- final, static, constructor method can't be overriden.
  :::

:::danger
**Method overloading is a way to achieve `dynamic polymorphism` in java.**
:::

If a method in a subclass has the same method signature as a method in its superclass, the subclass method overrides the inherited method. If a method in a subclass has the different method signature as a method in its superclass, the subclass method overloads the inherited method.

```java
class SuperParent{
    static void show(double x){
        System.out.println("Super Parent");
    }
}
class Parent extends SuperParent{
    static void show(int x){
        System.out.println("Parent");
    }
}
class Test extends Parent{
    public static void main(String[] args){
        show(4);
        show(4.5);
    }
}
```
