Global objects are objects that are available everywhere in a Node.js application without importing or requiring them.

👉 Similar idea to `window` in browsers, but Node.js does NOT have `window`.

Instead, Node.js provides its own global environment.

## `__dirname`

`__dirname` is a string that contains the absolute path of the directory where the current JavaScript file is located.

It refers to the folder, not the file.

`console.log(__dirname);` output: `C:\Users\John\projects\node-app`

- Node.js automatically sets this value
- It helps locate files relative to the current script
- Works regardless of where the script is run from

### Why \_\_dirname Is Important

- Bad practice: `fs.readFile("data.txt");`
- Good practice: `fs.readFile(__dirname + "/data.txt");`
  This avoids path errors.

## `__filename`

`__filename` gives the absolute path of the current file, including the file name.

It refers to the file, not just the directory.

`console.log(__filename);` output `C:\Users\John\projects\node-app\app.js`

- Shows the full file path
- Useful for logging, debugging, and file operations

### Difference Between `__dirname` and `__filename`

| `__dirname`            | `__filename`            |
| ---------------------- | ----------------------- |
| Directory path         | File path               |
| No file name           | Includes file name      |
| Used for folder access | Used for file reference |

## `process`

`process` is a global object that provides information about and control over the current Node.js process.

It allows you to:

- Read environment variables
- Access command-line arguments
- Exit the process
- Get system info

**Example**

- `console.log(process.pid);` show `12345`
  - `pid` = process ID
  - Unique identifier for the running Node process
- `console.log(process.version);` show `v18.19.0`
- run `node app.js hello 100` and `console.log(process.argv);` will show
  ```
  [
    'C:\\Program Files\\nodejs\\node.exe',
    'C:\\project\\app.js',
    'hello',
    '100'
  ]
  ```

  - First two values are always Node path & file path
  - Remaining values are user inputs
- `console.log(process.env.NODE_ENV);` used to identify development/production mode, very common in real-world apps
- `process.exit(0);` - Stops the program immediately
  - `0` means successful exit

## Key Differences: Browser vs Node.js

| Browser JS           | Node.js       |
| -------------------- | ------------- |
| `window` object      | No `window`   |
| `document` available | Not available |
| `__dirname`          | `__dirname`   |
| `process`            | `process`     |
