---
sidebar_position: 2
---

## Key Characteristics of React

1. **Declarative:** You describe how the UI should look for a given state, and React updates the DOM automatically.
2. **Component-Based:** The UI is broken into small, reusable pieces called components.
3. **Virtual DOM:** React uses a virtual representation of the DOM to improve performance.
4. **One-Way Data Flow:** Data flows from parent components to child components.

## What is Component-Based Architecture?

In React, the UI is built using components.

A component is:

- A reusable piece of UI
- A JavaScript function or class
- Can accept input (called props)
- Returns JSX (HTML-like syntax)

## JSX in React

React uses JSX, which looks like HTML but is actually JavaScript.

```js
const element = <h1>Hello, React!</h1>;
```

Behind the scenes:

```js
React.createElement("h1", null, "Hello, React!");
```

## Data Flow in Component-Based Architecture

React follows one-way data flow:

```
Parent Component
      ↓ props
Child Component
```

Example:

```js
<UserInfo name="Alice" age={25} />
```


## Fragments
It is a way to group multiple elements `without adding extra nodes` to the DOM. They allow to return multiple children from a component without the need to wrap them in an additional HTML like _div_.

__There are tow ways to use fragments:__

1. __Explict Syntax:__
```jsx
<React.Fragment>
</React.Fragment>
```
2. __Shorthand Systax:__
```jsx
<></>
```
The shorthand syntax is more concise and commonly used but doesn't support `key` or other attributes.

Render method can return only one elements. So when you need to return multiple element at a time but you don't want to add extra node to the DOM, use fragment.
## List Rendering
React allows you to render lists by mapping over an array of data and returning JSX for each item in the array. The `map()` function is commonly used for this purpose.

The key prop is a special attribute that helps React identify which items have changed, been added, or removed. It should be unique among the siblings.
## Conditional Rendering
IIFE can be used inside jsx to handle conditional rendering with `if-else` logic.
```jsx
const Example = () => {
  const isLoggedIn = true;
  return (
    <>
      {(()=>{
        if(isLoggedIn){
          return <h1>Welcome Back</h1>
        }else{
          return <h1>Please Login First</h1>
        }
      })}
    </>
  );
};

export default Example;
```
## `public` Diroctory
It contains static assets that will be served directly to the browser without being preprocessed by Webpack so you can't use js imports or other advanced features here. Files in this directory are accessible via a direct URL path.
- `index.html` is the primary HTML file that serves your react application
- `static file`: any images, font, documents
- `manifest.json` is used for configuring how your react app appears when installed as a progressive web app(PWA). It defines the icons, name and other setting
- `robots.txt` tells web crawlers and robots which page to index or ignore on your site.

Everything here is copied directly to the `build` folder when you run `npm run build`. Missing files will not be called at compilation time and will be caused `404` error.
## `src` Directory
It is where all your applications components and logic reside. It contains the actual source code that Webpack will process, bundle and optimize. Unlike `public` folder, files in `src` are not accessible via a direct URL path, they need to be imported into your componets to be included in the build.
- `index.js` is the main entry point where the react app is mounted to the DOM.
- `App.js` is the root component of the application
Scripts and stylesheets get minified and bundled together to avoid extra network request. Missing file cause compoiltation error instead of `404` error
