---
sidebar_position: 20
---

## HTML

React uses JSX(Javascript XML), a syntax extension for javascript, which looks similar to HTML but allows you to embed HTML within javascript.

Although JSX looks like javascript, it's not. JSX gets compiled to javascript, specially to `React.createElement` calls, which is why it can only be used within a React environment.

**Differences From HTML:**

- `className` instead of `class`
- camleCase for Attributes
- self-closing tags

### JSX

JSX is a syntax extension for JavaScript that resembles HTML. It allows you to write elements and components in a more readable and familiar way. JSX is neither a string nor HTML; it is JavaScript that gets compiled to `React.createElement()` calls by Babel (a JavaScript compiler).

**How JSX Works:**
JSX is converted into JavaScript function calls. For example:

```jsx
const element = <h1>Hello, world!</h1>;
```

is compiled to:

```jsx
const element = React.createElement("h1", null, "Hello, world!");
```

### Rendering a React Element

**Example:**

```jsx
const element = <h1>Hello, world!</h1>;

const root = ReactDOM.createRoot(document.getElementById("root"));
root.render(element);
```

## CSS

- Instead of a CSS string, React expects a JavaScript object.

1.  **External CSS:**
    Just import external css file where you want those styles. Those style from the imported files are inherit to all the child component
2.  **Inline Style:**
    You can apply styles directly to elements using the `style` attribute which accepts a javascript object. One curly is used as js object and another curly is used for jsx and enable js.

        For multiple css variable use `style={{...variable_1, ...variable_2}}`,you can also use `style={{...variable_1, ...{fontSize:"50px",color:"red"}}}`.

    - No pseudo-classes or media queries

3.  **Modules:**
    CSS modules are locally scoped CSS files, which means the styles defined in them are only applied to the component that imports them.. This prevents global name collisions. - create a css file with `.module.css` extension.
    `css
.container{ padding: 20px; background-color:"red"; }
` - import the css file into your react component as a module and aply styles
    `jsx
import styles from './App.module.css'
return( <div className={styles.container}></div>)
`

### Styled Components

Styled-Components lets you create React components that already have styles attached to them.

```jsx
const Title = styled.h1`
  color: purple;
  font-size: 28px;
`;
```

Installation

```
npm install styled-components
```

- `styled.h1` creates a styled React component
- Backticks (`\``) allow writing real CSS
- Styles apply only to `Title`
- No CSS file needed

**Styling with Props**

```jsx
const Button = styled.button`
  background-color: ${(props) => (props.primary ? "teal" : "gray")};
  color: white;
  padding: 10px 16px;
  border-radius: 6px;
  border: none;

  &:hover {
    background: lightblue;
  }

  @media (max-width: 600px) {
    width: 100px;
  }
`;

<Button primary>Primary</Button>;
```

- Props directly control CSS
- No conditional classes
- Clean and readable

**Extending Styles**

```jsx
const BaseButton = styled.button`
  padding: 10px;
`;

const DangerButton = styled(BaseButton)`
  background: red;
`;
```

**Global Styles**

```jsx
import { createGlobalStyle } from "styled-components";

const GlobalStyle = createGlobalStyle`
  body {
    margin: 0;
    font-family: sans-serif;
  }
`;
```

## Javascript

JSX allows you to embed JavaScript expressions directly within the markup. You can use any valid JavaScript expression inside curly braces `{}` in JSX.
