
## Breadboard

Power line have a two line, positive one with red color and negative one with black color. This are vertically shorted, all the point produces same voltage that one pin supplied.

Other rows with sign a, b, c, d, e are horizontally sorted.

Divider have no pin. Don't place any device on the divider.

The breadboard is a white rectangular board with small embedded holes to insert electronic components.

### Layout

### Power Rails

Along the top and bottom edges, there are two long rows. These are typically used to distribute power and are labeled `+` for positive voltage and `-` for ground. Each rail is isolated and can provide different voltages for various parts of the circuit. They are connected `horizontally`.

It means a single horizontal line of a breadboard has the same connection. It is because the metal strip underneath the breadboard at the top and bottom are connected horizontally. Hence, it provides the same connection in a row. The two top and bottom parts of a breadboard are generally used for power connections.

### Terminal Strips

**Arrangement:** Terminal strips are the main area where electronic components are inserted. Each column has a series of holes aligned `vertically`, and each row is grouped into 5-hole blocks.

The vertical connection of the center part means a single vertical line in a breadboard provides the same connection. It is useful when we need to connect the different components in series.

**Electrical Connection:** In each 5-hole block, all five holes are electrically connected in a row (or column), allowing multiple component leads to be connected together. For example, if you insert the legs of an LED into one of these blocks, the current can flow through the connected path.

**Central Divider/Gap:** The terminal strips are divided by a central channel that runs lengthwise. This gap is specifically designed to accommodate ICs. When you place an IC in this central gap, each pin on one side of the IC is isolated from the pins on the other side, making it easier to connect other components to individual pins.
