---
title: Fundamentals
sidebar_position: 2
---

A robot is a programmable machine that can carry out tasks autonomously or semi-autonomously. These machines are capable of perceiving their environment, processing information, and executing actions to achieve specific objectives.

## Key Components

Input, processor, output, memory, power supply are the hardware part of the robots, programming is called software.

### 1.`Input(Sensors)`

It gather real-time data from the environment to make informed decisions and take actions.

- Vision sensors (cameras, infrared)
- Proximity sensors (to detect nearby objects)
- Gyroscopes and accelerometers (for orientation and movement)
- Touch sensors (detect physical interaction)
- Microphones (for sound recognition)

### 2.`Processor(Microcontroller)`

It processes the sensor data, runs algorithms, and sends commands to actuators to execute appropriate actions. It is a cheap or specialized circuit which is used for making decision. This is handled by a control system (microcontroller, processor, or compute).

- `Microcontroller`: A compact integrated circuit designed to manage the operations of a robot. Examples include Arduino, STM32.
- `Microprocessor`: A more powerful processing unit like a Raspberry Pi or NVIDIA Jetson, used for robots that need more computing power for complex tasks like AI-based navigation or object recognition.

### 3.`Output (Actuators)`

It execute physical actions like moving, picking up objects, or even communicating with humans based on the decisions made by the control system.

- **Motors**: Electric motors that convert electrical signals into mechanical movement.
  - **DC motors** for general motion control (e.g., driving wheels).
  - **Servo motors** for precise angular control (e.g., in robotic arms).
  - **Stepper motors** for controlled, incremental movements.
- **End Effectors**: Tools at the end of robotic arms, like grippers, welders, or cutting tools, that allow the robot to interact with objects in the environment.
- **Displays/Sound Output**: Some robots also output information to screens, lights, or speakers to communicate with humans.

### 4.`Memory`

It enables the robot to remember and store critical data, ensuring the robot can function efficiently by recalling programs and sensor information when needed.

### 5.`Power Supply`

Robots need energy to operate, which can come from batteries, solar power, electrical grids, or other sources.

### 6.`Programming(Software)`

It defines the logic of the robot’s behavior, allowing it to understand sensor data, process it, and perform actions.
