
A view in MySQL is a virtual table that is based on the result of a `SELECT` query.

- It does not store data physically (unless you use `WITH CHECK OPTION` in certain cases).
- Acts like a shortcut to a query — you can treat it like a table.

Think of a view as a saved query that you can reuse.

**Advantages of Views**

- **Simplicity:** Complex queries can be saved as a view, so users can just query the view.
  - Instead of repeating a big join, you just `SELECT * FROM employee_info`.
- **Security:** You can restrict access to sensitive columns.
  - Example: Create a view that excludes the salary column and give users access only to that view.
- **Reusability:** One query definition can be reused many times.
- **Data abstraction:** Changes in table structure can be hidden behind a view.
  - Example: If table columns change, you can update the view definition, keeping applications working.
- **Logical separation:** Provides a layer between applications and base tables.

**Limitations of Views**

- **Performance overhead:** Views don’t store data; every time you query a view, MySQL executes the underlying query.
  - If the view has complex joins, performance may be slow.
- **Dependency issues:** If underlying tables change (dropped columns, renamed columns), views may break.
- No indexes directly on views: You cannot create an index on a view itself (only on underlying tables).

- Update restrictions: Not all views are updatable. You can update a view only if it’s based on a single table without: `DISTINCT`, `GROUP BY`, `HAVING`, `UNION`, Aggregate functions (`SUM`, `AVG`, etc.)

  ```sql
  CREATE VIEW dept_salary AS
  SELECT department, AVG(salary) AS avg_salary
  FROM employees
  GROUP BY department;
  ```

  Cannot update this view, because it’s an aggregate.

## Creating Views

```sql
CREATE VIEW view_name AS
SELECT columns
FROM tables
WHERE conditions;
```

**Example of Simple View:**
Create a view for all IT employees:

```sql
CREATE VIEW it_employees AS
SELECT emp_id, name, salary
FROM employees
WHERE department = 'IT';
```

Now you can query the view like a table:

```sql
SELECT * FROM it_employees;
```

**View with Join**

```sql
CREATE TABLE departments (
    dept_id INT PRIMARY KEY,
    dept_name VARCHAR(50),
    location VARCHAR(100)
);

CREATE VIEW employee_info AS
SELECT e.emp_id, e.name, d.dept_name, d.location
FROM employees e
JOIN departments d ON e.department = d.dept_name;
```

Now:

```sql
SELECT * FROM employee_info WHERE location = 'New York';
```

## Using Views

**Use View to update data:**

```sql
UPDATE it_employees
SET salary = salary + 5000
WHERE emp_id = 101;
```

## Modifying and Dropping Views

Modify:

```sql
CREATE OR REPLACE VIEW it_employees AS
SELECT emp_id, name, salary
FROM employees
WHERE department = 'IT' AND salary > 60000;
```

Drop:

```sql
DROP VIEW it_employees;
```
